---
layout: page
subheadline: "Thoughts and Theories"
title: "Time Machine: The Multiverse Paradigm of Time Travel"
teaser: "Thoughts and Theories may not relate to programming, but rather a process of considering an idea. This could be anything - for this one, a structured idea of how time travel can work with paradoxes"
header:
    image_fullwidth: "time_travel.jpg"
    caption: Image by Shutterstock
    caption_url: "https://www.shutterstock.com"
image:
    thumb:  time_travel.jpg
    homepage: time_travel.jpg
categories:
    - design
comments: true
show_meta: false
---
I, like many other’s, am greatly interested in the idea of time travel. However, with so many conflicting ideas, I’d like to share one that is relatively simple, makes sense and follows the many world theory suggested by Quantum Mechanics.
<!--more-->

To explain it simply, I’ll tell a story:

> Once, there was a man named Bob. He and his friend, Fred, lived together. However, Fred eventually made a mistake, resulting in his Mom’s death.
> The next events as seen by each of them:

> Bob
> Bob discovered time travel, and went back in time, stopping this event from happening. He went back to his own time, and saw Fred, along with his Mom. Fred had no recollection of the previous events. The change worked.

> Fred
> Bob spent less time with Fred for a while, but not unusually. Bob claimed he discovered time travel, but Fred didn’t believe him. Bob showed him, and said he’d be back in a few seconds. He vanished. Fred waited an hour before giving up. Bob was never seen again.

The basis of this method is that by traveling back in time, you create a new ‘universe’ and change of events where you’ve changed it. The old one remains unchanged, but it CANNOT BE ACCESSED. There would be no way to get back. You could create a new similar world, perhaps even an essentially identical one but it’s not the same. When you go back, it’s for good.

From the point of view of someone there, the person disappears forever IN MOST CASES.If the change in time does not affect the fact that person went back in time (Eg. They failed to change the past, but didn’t know), it would be possible that person went back in the altered timeline, and the one after that etc. This would make it possible, in this case, to have someone disappear, and reappear seconds later in essentially the same situation as leaving. A good example is Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Askaban. In the multiverse paradigm, not going back in time. At the end would have the same effect as going back in time – going back would only create an identical new universe. The time travel would only have any affect in the original timeline, when Buckbeak died.

So, a set of rules:
1) Going back in time creates an alternative universe where the changed events happened
2) You CANNOT move to or destroy a universe. The only way is by creating a new one via time travel
3) The old universe still exists, but completely unaffected by any events, other than any that may have created it

These rules prevent paradox’s and create a reasonable method for time travel. If you can come up with any situation this could possibly create a dispute in, applaud yourself before mentioning it in the comments.

Taken from Quora at https://qr.ae/TUfdaf