---
layout: page
subheadline: "Stories"
title: "Battle Scene"
teaser: "I thought I'd try writing a combat scene and seeing where it goes - this was the result"
header:
    image_fullwidth: "rising.png"
    caption: Image by Joseph
    caption_url: "https://www.worldanvil.com/w/eylaisia-black-photon"
image:
    thumb:  rising.png
    homepage: rising.png
categories:
    - stories
comments: true
---

*I randomly wrote this battle scene against the Aritek. If I were to finish the series, it would likely be near the end of the first book or even more likely, the second book somewhere.*

<!--more-->

“Into the cave!” Around the group, fire was hailing from the sky, each precisely hitting each one of them one by one. Alam saw in the corner of his eye one of the red beams coming down to his left, disintegrating his fellow. He gritted his teeth as he led the group into cover as quickly as possible. The cave was somewhat damp, with only one, rather large, entrance. For better or worse, they were stuck here until they managed to get past that ship. “We’ll stick here for the time being, regain our strength. Squad 8, cover the entrance in case of infantry.” Alam issued commands replied with a chorus of ‘Yes Sir’s. Then he sat down to consider the situation, alongside Colonel Arbridge and Colonel Yates and Meridith.

“They’ve got us pinned down. There’s no way we’ll be able to break through while that ship’s still raining fire upon us. I don’t suppose this tunnel heads anywhere Yates?” He asked knowing Yates had lived in this region once for a time

“No, it’s been caved in a kilometer down as long as I remember”

“Hmm, undoubtebly they will be sending infantry down soon as they can’t hit us from up there. Our best chance might be to ambush them as well as possible as they enter. But stilll…”

“General Torus! There’s a vehicle driving this way. It seems to be our side.”

“Well, clear the entrance. Maybe they have what we need to beat this thing.” 10 seconds later an oddly shaped white armoured truck flew into the cave. It had some burn marks on it, so it looked at least tough enough to stand the lasers, but it was too small for more than maybe 10 people to fit in. The side was engraved with the insignia of the Almac science association, specifically, the Defensive division. A door on the sidee suddenly opened up to reveal a woman with black hair.

“Tessie?” Alam questioned. She laughed.

“Yes, I’m glad I’m still recognisable.”

“It’s been some time.”

“Yes, though I suggest we save reminicing for later and first look at how to get you out of this bind.”

“Got a secret weapon?”

“No. But we have some ordinary ones we might repurpose.”

“Well, lets see what you’ve got.” They stepped into the truck to reveal a complex layout of scattered research notes, half-finished inventions and a small area of neat ordered things.

“We’ve got all the goods here. First I present the precision boom device. Shoot something with a tracker, and the device will avoid all obsticals to reach it.”

“Including precision space lasers?” Tessie thought a moment.

“Probably not actually given they’re so instantaneous. Ok, next specimin: The magnetic disruption field generator – disrupts all use of magnetically inclined devices, without affecting electricity, and thus is much smaller than an EMP.” Alam shook his head.

“The ship seems to be staying up by some kind of gravity disruption field, and light plasma exhaust. I doubt that would do a thing.”

“Hmm, I see! Well, we also have an umbrella that resists damage, but I doubt it could survive something like that…” Their conversation is interupted by a shout from outside.

“They’ve sent down an infantry unit.” Alam swore.

“Ok, keep them away from the cave.”

“Sir, their armour resists our weapons – we can’t hurt them at all.”

“Hmm, got anything that can get through that armour Tessie?”

“I doubt it, other than powerful explosives.” Alam thought carefully.

“What about our Xeades?” The elite Soarers units used specialized swords for the majority of combat, being designed carefully for strength, deflection and penetration. Tessie had to think at this.

“You know, I’m not sure. Without more information about their armor, it’s hard to tell.”

On this, Alam called “Soarers, prepare to take out the enemies that get in. Their armor might be vulnerable to the Xeades” He gave a look outside to see the display, and sure enough, the swords cut right through the armor. ‘Well that’s one problem solved’ he thought to himself. Going back inside, he asked Tessie for the last few items.

“Unfortunately, these ones weren’t even really designed for open combat exactly, so probably won’t be useful. Take this.” She threw a small disk-like object to Alam, who caught it. This just sends out various electro-magnetic frequencies at low to medium amplitude. Unless you want to stick it to an enemy and wait for them to die of radiation poisoning.

“Hmm… ” Alam thought, then had an idea “Can you set one to infra-red setting and give it to me?”

Tessie looked very confused. “Ok, but why?” she asked, handing him the device.

Without talking, he left the van and threw it outside the cave. A few seconds after landing, it was engulfed by a bright red light, as the ship above shot it. Tessie saw and finally understood what he was thinking.

“Oh… That could work! We have a surprisingly big supply of these – another 39! That might be enough! And they can be fired using the general projectile weapons!”

“General Projectile?”

“One of those useless ones! You can load them with anything less than 30cm in width, length and height, and it will fire them! We thought it could be useful for long term scenarios with not enough energy for energy-weapons and not enough ammo for normal. You can just load rocks and it’ll work great!”

Alam laughed. “Well it’ll certainly be useful now! How about we start distributing them.” He then stepped outside the cave. “Squad 8, move to my position. Soarers, hold out the enemy until they return.” He waited for them to all get there before explaining. “We have some devices that are targeted by the ships. We will, distribute them, along with new firing equipment. You will load these devices, and fire them at the enemy. They will be shot by the ship and the enemy with them. Questions.” They were silent, and he started handing out the weapons. Soon they were all given out, and the squad returned to test them. Alam joined them to see the results. Somewhat to his surprise, it worked perfectly. The ship was targeting and shooting all of their own ground troops. But then, it stopped. They continued to fire devices, but there was no affect whatsoever.

“What do we do now?” One asked. Alam stepped outside the cave. As he did so, Colonel Albridge suddenly ran after him.

“Sir! It’s dangerous out there.” Alam smiled.

“Is it? I can’t help but notice I haven’t been killed by a laser yet. To save themselves, they completely disabled it.” He then stepped back in, calling all the Soarers but two to guard the entrance.

“Xeades swords are right now the only effective weapon we have against these enemies. However, they have a weakness and that is that this armor slows them down. Our armor is much more lightweight, and we should be able to move in, dodge their attacks, and defeat them. Our levitation should give the advantage of mobility we need to win. So, how about we take them down.”

After this speech, Tessie took a moment to catch Alam. “Before you head out, I have something else that might be useful.” She rummaged in the truck for a few seconds, before bringing out a pair of shoes. “I’ll be honest, I still love magnetic levitation way too much. But these shoes have an extra edge over the normal ones – they can jump. Just push the front of your foot down and it’ll fly into the air, just like those specialized ones back in Erith.Still looking into a nicer interface with them, but it should be enough control for now.” Alam gave her an admiring look before swapping them out, and moving up with the Soarers to the front of the cave.

“Move fast, and take them out. Heading out in 3, 2… Now!” And suddenly, the 14 Soarers left flew out of the cave, flying over the uneven terrain. Alam loved this feeling more than anything, and quickly drew his sword. Fire came upon them from the well formed enemy line. Most of them dodged or deflected the attack, but one got a bolt in the knee, bringing him down. The rest continued to follow Alam, closing the line, continuing to fire. Then the group on each side scattered out to their side away from the line, while Alam jumped up over the force. Taken from behind, they started to break rank, and the remaining Soarers on each side came in to take them now they were distracted. Alam defected every attack that came his way, surprising them with his mobility. Soon, there was no order, as the enemy forces stood scattered around. There were maybe 100 of them left, with the Soarers coming in at them on each direction to take them out. Then all of a sudden, a single more unit was send down. This one was much larger, even further armored with multiple weapons held. Alam could tell it would be more tricky to take down. Two Soarers came at it together from either side. It simply raised its weapons and fired. The Soarers tried to dodge, but the gunfire quickly moved to accommodate, and they fell.

Alam noticed and called out. “Merith, we’ve got to take it down. Us two act as bait, dodging its attacks, two more come in behind and take it out.” Merith nodded, and quickly passed on the plan. In unison, the two flew towards the titan, which did the same as before, shooting at them. However Merith and Alam were agile enough to continue dodging and deflecting as they approached. Alam jumped over the shots while Merith seemed to be doing the impossible making the most of every gap and chance. When they got close however, the unit changed its target to the two coming behind it instead. Alam swore as they fell. He and Merith would have to do it themselves. They came at him, and he quickly switched to short range precision weapons. At such a short range, they were harder to dodge, but the two continued to cut at the armor. But he wasn’t letting them get close to any of the weak parts, and it was too thick to fully cut through. Alam then decided to try jumping over and attacking from above. He flew up, but on the way down, he managed to get back to the quickfire weapon, and get Alam in the shoulder. Injured and exposed, he was forced to retreat back, and hope Merith could manage it.

With this, Merith almost seemed to move faster than before, seeming to become near invisible with the rapid direction changes. Distraction, deflection, distraction, and suddenly it was over. The rest of the Soarers had managed to take out the rest of the infantry in the meantime. With this victory, the ship in the sky suddenly vanished, seeming to fly up as fast as the link. Alam sighed with relief it was over, but there certainly were loses. They started with 500, but losing 200 to ship fire. And the initial 14 Soarers was now down to 9. Still, it seemed worth it to at least have a victory over the Aritek to speak of. Then Tessie came out of the truck with the solemn expression.

“We’ve lost the Issic Isles.”