---
layout: page
subheadline: "Thoughts and Theories"
title: "A Relatively Simple Space Idea"
teaser: "If you apply relativity to interstellar travel, you find a very interesting phenomenon..."
header:
    image_fullwidth: "space.jpg"
    caption: Image by Earth Blog
    caption_url: "http://earthspacecircle.blogspot.com/p/space-photos-and-wallpapers.html"
image:
    thumb:  space.jpg
    homepage: space.jpg
categories:
    - ideas
comments: true
---
One thing that many space travel stories ignore is relativity. This small but crucial part of physics potentially changes the whole landscape of space travel. 
<!--more-->

The problem being: If you travel from planet A to B, and B to A, then the time you experienced is less than experienced on planet A. This scales with speed so by traveling in a car, you wouldn’t notice much at all. However, traveling at near the speed of light would definitely be more noticeable.

One exciting consequence of relativity however, is you could travel 1 light year seeming only to take 1 hour for you! This is a result of length contraction, so the distance between the planets seems to massively shrink! But this comes at the consequence of people on earth still observing it taking a year.

Here’s an example: You hop on a spaceship, and send a signal to the earth. They receive this signal at 12:00 21/05/2025. You fly off to a planet 5 light years away at close to the speed of light. You sit in the rocket for 3 hours, and finally land on the planet. You then send a signal back to Earth to show you arrived safely. They receive this signal at 12:00 22/05/2035. That is, from their point of view, it took 5 years and 1 day for you to arrive on the planet, and 5 years for the signal to be received. But while it took that long for them, you sent the second signal only 3 hours after the first!

So if interstellar travel DID exist, it could actually work quite well, in the sense that you could get places quickly. HOWEVER this comes at the cost of almost ‘time-traveling’ into the future. This seems quite bad, but actually a society could develop using this system. Imagine working for a good few years, and then you and your family and friends jumping forward 50 years or so. You’d get to experience many centuries in one lifetime, while also solving the population problem. Got 10 billion people? Send 5 billion 50 years forward. It would be a strange, but amazing society that spans not only space, but time.

However, there is one small flaw I found with this idea. And that is that accelerating to near the speed of light would kill you, unless done over a very long period of time – that is at LEAST 100 days. This kinda ruins the whole ‘travel in only 3 hours’ part of the idea. But still, it’s a nice idea that could one day make up the landscape of interstellar travel.