---
layout: page
subheadline: "Thoughts and Theories"
title: "Time Travel Paper"
teaser: "A fictional paper introducing the idea of time travel"
header:
    image_fullwidth: "time_travel.jpg"
    caption: Image by Shutterstock
    caption_url: "https://www.shutterstock.com"
image:
    thumb:  time_travel.jpg
    homepage: time_travel.jpg
categories:
    - ideas
comments: true
---

One of my favourite things to do is come up with overcomplicated theories to explain why something works - almost like understanding the science behind magic. This was one of the things that got me into computer science, and why I still hold interest in Physics. What really goes on to allow a computer to work as it does.

<!--more-->

Lately I came across a role-play community for time travellers. While I enjoy it, I'm not particularly good at role-playing a convincing character other than my own personality, but it did give me a chance to work out some mechanics. The result was a paper, in which I used my best efforts to make convincing as a real time travel paper from the year 2850. It doesn't explicity mention it's time travel too much in there, talking mostly about manipulation of warp fields, and referencing a good number of papers that don't yet exist. But I did my best to make the physics look solid.

This was mostly just an activity to pass the time during this exam term while not revising. I'll be up with more programming stuff soon! In the meantime, you can find the PDF [here](/assets/pdf/A_Study_on_Temporal_Warp_Field_Mechanics.pdf). Feel free to comment any questions, thoughts or anything else relating to it (If I'm making it realistic, I should be able to at least answer questions about the mechanics described in the paper).