---
layout: page
subheadline: "Thoughts and Theories"
title: "Entropy: Does time have a direction?"
teaser: "Thoughts and Theories may not relate to programming, but rather a process of considering an idea. This could be anything - for this one, a structured idea of how time travel can work with paradoxes"
header:
    image_fullwidth: "time_travel.jpg"
    caption: Image by Shutterstock
    caption_url: "https://www.shutterstock.com"
image:
    thumb:  time_travel.jpg
    homepage: time_travel.jpg
categories:
    - ideas
comments: true
---
The first question is "What is entropy?" One answer I found on the internet was "The tendency for all matter and energy in the universe to evolve toward a state of inert uniformity." In other words, matter overall tends to become more chaotic over time. But what has that got to do with the direction of time?

Let's start with an example. Do you have 1 million pounds right now? I'm going to assume that for most people reading this, the answer is no. How can you be sure you don't? Well, you can check your bank account to see that the figure is clearly below one million. But how about 10 years ago. Did you have one million pounds then? How do you know? Well, you have your memories, surely you'd remember something that important. Also you'd have likely made different life choices - where you are now makes no sense if you once had one million pounds to spare. You can use evidence in the present to infer what likely occurred in the past. But if you wanted, you could talk to more people, check the news, look for 10 year old bank invoices. There is a plethora of evidence proving that in the past, you almost certainly didn't have one million pounds.

What about the future? Will you have 1 million pounds in the future? Well, you can't be sure. Unless you're going into business it's unlikely you would just earn it, but maybe you could save up, or win the lottery. Depending on how hard you try and what methods you try will affect the probabilities of these happening. But it's always probabilities. You can't know if you'll have one million pounds in 10 years until that time comes. Even next week, you can't be sure about - maybe you will win the lottery.

The past is almost completely deterministic. Certain results in the present indicate an almost certain assurance of what the past was like. But the future is not - certain causes in the present only indicate probabilties of events happening in the future. Maybe if we could track every atom, it might be near perfect, but this is much harder than determining the past.

So why does time seem to go forward? It's because we remember the past, and use it to change the future. Why can't we change the past? Because the past is all predetermined. You have memories of every action you will take in the past, and there is evidence of every word you said and every step you took. If we go backwards, you need to undo all of that, giving you no chance to do anything else. Meanwhile forwards there's no evidence of what you're going to do at all. I don't know if tomorrow I'll be dead, in Ireland, or just sitting at this laptop as I am now, even if I can take a good guess. That's because that's a choice. There are much less restrictions to what I can do in the future than in the past. I'm still limited by the laws of physics, but they allow more than one narrow path to follow.

You could say the future is also deterministic, and we're all made up of particles, but if you consider how to design a being that can take actions to make itself last longer in the future, you can simply create an organism like a human. If you want the same for a being that can take actions to keep itself alive longer in the past, it will need to somehow create the entire history and legacy of the being with the being itself, and it will need to shape the entire history of its past to do that. You can see this in time travel stories, when you change the past, it affects the present. So if our creature want's to decide it's past, it must do that by transforming the present. But you can't simply change the present - the present is a single state of space at a single point in time. Changing that space will change the entire history of the universe. So such a being would then actually live by moving between different universes across the fifth dimension whatever that is.

But moving back on topic, how does entropy come into this. Entropy means that the world will become more disorganised as we go, or in other words, more unpredictable. While we can create factories and tools that work deterministically, this is at the expense of energy in the brain designing them, which is for the most part, unpredictable. Every decision produces many effects, but you can't guess the effects from the decision. This is how entropy works when time goes forward.

But if we went backwards... Instead everything would slowly become more organised. Instead of releasing energy, stars would absorb it. Humans will deconstruct everything we've made, and slowly de-evolve to atoms. Eventually everything will come together to a single point called the Big Bang, because in the backwards world, many effects can turn into a single cause.

There are also places where the past isn't always deterministic, and the future isn't always predictable. Maybe a sand picture was created, but it was washed away by the sea, and the one who made it died. What was the picture of? In the present there are almost no clues left to predict that detail of the past. Likewise, will there be a sun tomorrow? The answer is almost certainly yes, as we know the laws of physics, and how ridiculously unlikely the sun vanishing would be. So to some degree, this doesn't completely hold. The past is mostly deterministic, and the future is mostly unpredictable, but not entirely. But it's this relationship that allows memory to exist - if you record an event, such as drawing a sand picture, when it happens in the past, it'll likely still be there in the future.

But why can't you record an event in the future so it'll be there in the past? That's because for that record to exist, it'll also need to have an entire history behind it of why it was there. Why not have a madman just scribble it down, and leave it in a shed. Then in backwards time, you can create your sand art, record it on the paper, and leave it in the shed for the madman to deconstruct it. But isn't this the same as being inspired by the madman's work and creating an image? What if you didn't cause the image? You record that there will be some disaster somewhere before it happens in backwards land (You know it will happen because in backwards land you know the future near perfectly). So you create a warning about it and put it in the shed for the madman to unwrite.

However, the problem is that in backwards logic, leaving the report in a shed is very unlikely, and it not being picked up by someone after the disaster takes place to unmake it is even less likely. In the forwards universe, entropy means if there is order, it is extremely likely for there to have been some specific meaningful events to cause it. A madman scribbling random notes and it happening to be a award winning physics paper is very unlikely. Usually a scientist will need to put in lots of thought and time to create one.

But in the backwards method, entropy is reversed. The probability of order coming from chaos is very high, such as a fire producing a well researched paper. But likewise, turning order to chaos is hard. This may not seem a problem, as you just want to create an ordered account of future events. But while in forwards land you can not care what happens as it'll eventually turn to chaos on its own, unless the ordered account came from the start of the universe (which is unlikely enough to ignore), you need to think of how to safely dispose of this ordered account. Throwing it into a fire is extremely irresponsible, as fire is so unlikely to destroy such a paper. Instead it must be brought to someone/something knowledgable in the subject, and carefully disassembled. If the paper stays in the shed until before the disaster, there will be nobody left knowledgable enough to safely destroy it.

Thinking in backwards terms is very complicated as you need to consider how likely something is to exist for it to exist. Different actions have different probabilities of being possible to begin with due to the long history between that point in time and the Big Bang. Realistically to send data to the past, you'll need to already have that data before you decide to send it in forwards land, which is extremely unlikely. When it comes down to it, you just need a single atom to be off and not collapse into the Big Bang for history to be invalidated. Therefore going backwards the universe needs to be extremely precise, which is why beings can't control it. Forwards however, we have entropy, and it doesn't really matter what we do - there's no Big Bang to have to recreate, so we can safely do what we want.

So in the end, the direction of time is determined by entropy. If entropy were reversed, we'd simply see that direction as the new 'forwards' for time.